Questionnaire on ICRC Museum visit
Swarali Karkhanis
HUM 427(a)
SCIPER:280674
1) How does the ICRC Museum exhibit the organizations ideology?
The ICRC museum tries to display the exhibits as a humanitarian experience rather than a simple
informative piece. The arrangement of the museum was such that it tried to portray wartime efforts
and stories through the lenses of Dunantist ideals of ICRC[1]. There was a noticeable emphasis put
into making the narrative as impartial as possible. The artifacts from various POW, even those
with the most condemnable actions were presented in a nonjudgmental setting. Many themes
in the exhibit revolve around the idea of connecting visitors to the world of humanitarian actions
through various interactive ways like Touching hands of the witnesses, Reading the correspondences
of individuals searching for lost family or Navigating through chains at the entrance of an exhibit
emblematic of struggle to move ahead. Such experiences present and invoke the core emotion
underlying humanitarian actions - Empathy. The theme of exhibits revolved around two depictions
- one of loss, struggle and hardships of the victims and the other of rise through tragedy, hope
and impact. The focus of exhibitions was on creating empathetic connections with the victims
instead of presenting mere facts of the story. This unconventional approach was appropriate in the
age of information where unlike the previous generations, overwhelming amount of information is
available at finger tips so the creators focused on the emotion.
2) What were the actors (including organizations and individuals)
at different levels and their actions that the ICRC Museum exhibit?
How saviors, victims, and villains were presented?
The actors in the ICRC museum exhibit were portrayed in two contrasting ways- one, Individually,
through their personal narrative or from their private artifacts and other, as a group of thousands
and millions, all sharing a common story. This was done to highlight the personal and societal
impacts of disasters. The goal of exhibits in the museum was to focus on the collective actions
and impacts rather than highlighting individualistic deeds. Although there were a lot of personal
narratives eg: Chamber of witnesses- they were meant to be representative of general sample. The
chambers with photos of thousands of Rwandan genocide victims or the millions WW1 correspon-
dences served as a reminder of the vastness of actions. The purpose of such displays was make
visitors realise the enormous number of affected actors on both sides of the war. This is also in-
line with ICRC’s philosophy of noninterference with world politics but condemnation of wartime
atrocities as a whole. Other interesting note was how victims and saviors were presented in similar
lights. This was done to highlight ICRC’s adherence to the tenth rule in ICRC Code of Conduct
where victims are treated a dignified manner[2].
Overall the exhibits mentions villains very rarely to remain true to the organization’s apolitical
nature. However it does not shy away from the calling out the Nazi atrocities(referred as one of
the biggest failures of ICRC) and some recent human rights violation cases. But such reference
are very few, and on the whole exhibit shows how ICRC tries try to remain as unobstructive as
possible.
13) Did you observe the three innate conflicts of humanitarian ac-
tions indicated by Michael Barnett (2011) in the Museums exhibi-
tions? Please elaborate what elements were present and what were
absent from the exhibition, and why you think the Museum opted
for such strategy.
The three conflicts of humanitarian actions indicated by Michael Barnett could be seen in varying
degrees in the Museum’s exhibitions. The powerful vs powerless conflict was openly addressed in a
lot of exhibits that dealt with ICRC’s work in war-zones. Since ICRC’s success depends upon the
cooperation from those with power, it acknowledges a fine line the organization must tread when
dealing in areas of conflicts. The artifacts from various POW camps, correspondences and reports
with prisons serve to underline the importance of apolitical actions of the agency to receive access
to the victims. The conflict of discretion vs attention is also presented in detail complementing the
prior conflict. Although the organization’s ideals still lean heavily towards discretion in order to
receive cooperation during conflicts, some instances of humanitarian failure to action like WW2 and
Rwanda Genocide prompted ICRC to rework this approach. ICRC still remains fairly unintrusive
in the political spectrum, but it is seen to lean in during extreme human rights crises and uses it’s
voice and reach for public condemnation of such actions. The reflections on the money vs morals
conflict, however, is almost absent from the exhibitions. Baring a few references to how ICRC is
funded and the importance of independence from government agencies, there is no mention of this
conflict. This is probably done to highlight ICRC’s independence from their donating entities.
References
[1] Barnett, Michael. 2005. Humanitarianism Transformed.
[2] International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the ICRC. 1994. Code of
Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief [online]. [cited 1994]. Available from World Wide Web:
(https://www.icrc.org/eng/assets/files/publications/icrc-002-1067.pdf).
2
